# runtime_digital_fingerprint

A Dart package for fingerprinting machines.


## Overview

This Dart package provides a solution for the problem of fingerprinting devices. Different pieces of information may be
used to identify devices. Some of these pieces of information are:
* Unique IDs assigned at the time of OS installation
* specific combinations of hardware such as CPU, memory, and GPU

None of these single pieces of information provides a guarantee of uniqueness, but if used together, then you may have
higher confidence of uniqueness.


## Uses

Keeping track of individual devices is important in areas such as software licensing and fraud prevention.


## Supported platforms

The `runtime_digital_fingerprint` package supports:
* macOS
* Windows
* Linux

The `runtime_digital_fingerprint` package is NOT currently available for:
* Android
* iOS
* web


## Installation

To add `runtime_digital_fingerprint` to your Dart package, include it in your pubspec.yaml file:
```yaml
dependencies:
  runtime_digital_fingerprint: ^1.0.0
```


## Usage

Import the `runtime_digital_fingerprint` package in your code and call the method that you want.

The list of currently available fingerprinting methods is:
* MachineID: a UUID that is generated at operating system install time. This value is sufficient for identifying machines in all non-pathological cases (see Unique Key Reliability section below)
* CPU: a string that describes the machine's CPU
* Memory: the amount of physical memory installed in this machine
* GPU: a string that describes the machine's GPU, or null if no GPU could be found
* MAC address: a string that represents the machine's MAC address
* IP address: a string that represents the machine's IP address


```dart
import 'package:runtime_digital_fingerprint/runtime_digital_fingerprint.dart';

const String machineId = await MachineId.machineId();
```


## Examples

```shell
% dart example/machineid_example.dart
The machineId for this machine is: 827AA042-5900-5208-9D1A-308FAF23E12A
```


## Tests

Run `dart test` or use the GitHub Actions workflow to run on multiple platforms.

`runtime_digital_fingerprint` has been tested on all supported platforms: macOS (macOS Sonoma), Linux (Ubuntu 22.04.2,
Fedora 38, Debian GNU Linux 12), and Windows (Windows 11).


## Implementation details for runtime_digital_fingerprint

Various command-line tools and resources are used to gather information about the machine.

On macOS, these are:
* system_profiler
* ioreg
* networksetup

On Linux, these are:
* /proc/meminfo
* lspci
* lscpu
* /var/lib/dbus/machine-id
* ifconfig

On Windows, these are:
* systeminfo
* wmic
* reg
* ipconfig
* getmac

### Why not use lshw?

`lshw` may be used to get information about memory and GPU on Linux, but it is not installed by default on all versions
of Linux.


## Implementation details for MAC address

On macOS, the strategy to determine MAC address is to first look for a Wi-Fi interface. Then, if no Wi-Fi interface is
found, then look for an Ethernet interface.

### Can a device's MAC address be used for fingerprinting?

Due to many reasons:
* [randomization](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/MAC_address#Randomization)
* the ability of a user to [change](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/MAC_spoofing) it

MAC addresses are not a reliable source for device fingerprinting.


## Implementation details for IP address

`Network.iPAddress()` returns the *local* IP address of the machine.

On macOS, the strategy to determine IP address is to first look for a Wi-Fi interface. Then, if no Wi-Fi interface is
found, then look for an Ethernet interface.

### Can a device's IP address be used for fingerprinting?

Due to many reasons:
* changes a lot (joining/leaving network, DHCP)
* not unique (LANs are typically allocated in private IP address ranges)

IP addresses are not a reliable source for device fingerprinting.


## Implementation details for MachineID

### Main Features (copied from [here](https://github.com/denisbrodbeck/machineid?tab=readme-ov-file#main-features))

* Cross-Platform (tested on Win7+, Debian 8+, Ubuntu 14.04+, OS X 10.6+, FreeBSD 11+)
* No admin privileges required
* Hardware independent (no usage of MAC, BIOS or CPU — those are too unreliable, especially in a VM environment)
* IDs are unique to the installed OS (not specific to user)

### Background

Adapted from [machineid Go package](https://github.com/denisbrodbeck/machineid?tab=readme-ov-file#snippets)

#### Unique Key Reliability (copied from [here](https://github.com/denisbrodbeck/machineid?tab=readme-ov-file#unique-key-reliability))

Do note, that machine-id and MachineGuid can be changed by root/admin, although that may not come without cost (broken
system services and more). Most IDs won't be regenerated by the OS, when you clone/image/restore a particular OS
installation. This is a well known issue with cloned Windows installs (not using the official sysprep tools).

Linux users can generate a new id with dbus-uuidgen and put the id into `/var/lib/dbus/machine-id` and
`/etc/machine-id`. Windows users can use the sysprep toolchain to create images, which produce valid images ready for
distribution. Such images produce a new unique machine ID on each deployment.

#### Security Considerations (copied from [here](https://github.com/denisbrodbeck/machineid?tab=readme-ov-file#security-considerations))

A machine ID uniquely identifies the host. Therefore, it should be considered "confidential", and must not be exposed
in untrusted environments. If you need a stable unique identifier for your app, do not use the machine ID directly.

> A reliable solution is to hash the machine ID in a cryptographically secure way, using a fixed, application-specific
> key.

That way the ID will be properly unique, and derived in a constant way from the machine ID but there will be no way to
retrieve the original machine ID from the application-specific one.

#### Details for macOS IOPlatformUUID

https://developer.apple.com/library/archive/documentation/DeviceDrivers/Conceptual/IOKitFundamentals/TheRegistry/TheRegistry.html

> Is there any official Apple documentation that says what the IOPlatformUUID means, and not just that it exists?

> Not that I know of

https://gitlab.freedesktop.org/dbus/dbus/-/merge_requests/367

introduced ca. 2008:

http://web.archive.org/web/20111210071506/http://www.afp548.com/article.php?story=leopard_byhost_changes

#### Details for Windows MachineGuid

Possible issue: cloned machines can have the same MachineGuid

https://www.reddit.com/r/sysadmin/comments/stvr5h/hklmsoftwaremicrosoftcryptography_machineguid/

#### Details for Linux /dbus/machine-id

https://man7.org/linux/man-pages/man5/machine-id.5.html


